[WIP] MSC4284: Placeholder (#4284)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/4284-policy-servers.md

Author: This does indeed look like behaviour related to our policy server implementation in the room. The team has adjusted some of the parameters (around the time of the comment), and it should be fixed for you now.

If you continue to have issues, send an email to abuse@matrix.org to appeal the automated decision making.

Author: Implementation requirements:

TBD when leaving WIP.

Author: To start tracking the implementations early though:

* https://github.com/maunium/meowlnir/pull/21 - Server-as-a-Bot
* https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18387 - Checker-in-a-Homeserver
* https://github.com/element-hq/policyserv_spam_checker - Temporary Checker-in-a-Homeserver
* Element's (currently/temporarily closed source) server

Author: policyserv is now open source: https://github.com/matrix-org/policyserv + https://matrix.org/blog/2025/12/policyserv/

> # MSC4284: Policy Servers

Reviewer: Personally this MSC in its current state is proposing something that sounds like the reverse of a recent idea in Draupnir of extending the API as to allow the easy creation of external protections. But this MSC instead proposes an API for calling into a Evaluator over fed.

I personally think this sounds like a great idea as this approach allows the maintainence of the philosophy of letting homeservers focus on being homeservers and farms out moderation to dedicated tooling that is fit for purpose. This is great for not only extensibility but also maintainability of these capabilities. 

Draupnir has recently started to venture into this direction a tiny bit via its HS Admin Capabilities and Synapse module. This shows theres definetively an appatite for this type of capabilitity in the ecosystem. I have also seen wishes for this exact type of MSC expressed recently.

Author: thanks for the positive feedback :) I'm resolving the thread for checklist purposes, but I do appreciate feedback like this on MSC.

moderation bots listed above already do today.

This tooling is entirely optional, and decided upon by the room/community itself, similar to moderation
bots. The specific filtering behaviour is left as an implementation detail, and is expected to be
configurable by the community using the policy server. Some examples may include preventing images
from being sent to their rooms, disallowing lots of messages from being sent in a row, and limiting
the number of mentions a user can make.

While there isn't anything which prevents policy servers from operating in private or encrypted rooms,
the intended audience is public (or near-public) rooms and communities. Most communities may not need
a policy server and can instead rely on moderation bots or other forms of moderation. Those which do
decide to use a policy server may find that they have it disabled or in a low power state most of the
time.

## Proposal

**This is a work in progress.**

A *Policy Server* (PS) is a server which implements the newly-defined `/check` API described below.
This may be an existing logical server, such as matrix.org, or a dedicated host which serves no other

> purpose.

Author: this needs to spell out that the PS implementation does *not* have to implement the full federation API if it doesn't want to: just the bits needed to handle `/check` and get a join event into the room.

> Rooms which elect to use a policy server would do so via the new `m.room.policy` state

Reviewer 2: Bikeshedding: not a fan of `m.room.policy` as a state event name, it's too generic. Maybe something like `m.room.event_filtering`?

Reviewer 3: The terminology also would otherwise conflict with the widely used "policy lists"

Author: It's expected that policy servers will handle more than just events in future. We'll save the naming bikeshed for FCP :)

event (empty state key). The `content` would be something like:

```json5
{
    "via": "policy.example.org"
}
```

**TODO**: Array for multiple policy servers?

Provided `policy.example.org` is in the room, that server receives events as any other homeserver
in the room would, *plus* becomes a Policy Server. If `policy.example.org` is not in the room, the

> assignment acts as though it was undefined: the room does not use a policy server.

Reviewer 4: Maybe I'm missing something obvious, but why is the policy server required to be a Matrix server that is participating in the room?

Reviewer 5: This also appears to contradict the earlier statement: "This may be an existing logical server, such as matrix.org, or a dedicated host which serves no other purpose."

Reviewer 6: @Johennes My understanding of that sentence is simply that the `/check` endpoint may be implemented by an existing homeserver domain, or by a dedicated homeserver domain that doesn't provide any other Matrix functionality.

Author: > Maybe I'm missing something obvious, but why is the policy server required to be a Matrix server that is participating in the room?

This is to ensure the policy server consents to its role in the room. Otherwise, any random policy server could be dragged into doing work it's not prepared to deal with. The same concept is applied to homeservers: if your server isn't in a position to deal with HQ, then simply don't join HQ and you'll be okay.

Policy servers by their nature will need to consider how they work under attack/load, but most communities won't need massive DDoS protections to operate a policy server. In the general case, 99% uptime is probably fine, which will typically be the consequence of using a higher performance language like Rust or Go. Communities like matrix.org itself will need to consider putting Cloudflare in front of the server and designing the architecture to be resistant to takedown attempts, getting closer to 99.999% (or whatever SLA is more reasonable than just 99%).

Author: > This also appears to contradict the earlier statement: "This may be an existing logical server, such as matrix.org, or a dedicated host which serves no other purpose."

What @jivanpal said. A logical server would be matrix.org (which runs Synapse) having code that supports the policy server API. A dedicated server would implement the policy server API and whatever else is a necessity to participate in Matrix (basically just `/send` and `/key/v2/server` from the Federation API) - endpoints like `/get_missing_events` would be unimplemented. 

This is supposed to be clarified in the MSC, but isn't. See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284/files#r2090214975

If a policy server is in use by the room, homeservers SHOULD call the `/check` API defined below on
all locally-generated events before fanning them out and on all remote events before delivering them

> to local users. If the policy server recommends treating the event as spam, the event SHOULD be soft

Reviewer 7: As an escape hatch, should the homeserver accept events recognised as coming from a room admin without a policy check?

(Maybe even allow a room admin to set a threshold, so that a moderation bot can operate directly, while letting the admins to remove the bot with a normal kick)

Author: This would be something for implementations to consider for sure. The MSC uses `SHOULD` to be deliberately permissive to this kind of behaviour.

Author: The MSC has since changed quite a bit on this, but outlines how to prevent the policy server from interfering. If a community is concerned about over-eager policy servers, they can adjust accordingly.

failed if remote and rejected if local. This means local users should encounter an error if they
attempt to send "spam" (by the policy server's definition), and events sent by remote users will
never make it to a local user's client. If the policy server recommends allowing the event, the event

> should pass unimpeded.

Reviewer 7: Maybe the signed recommendation should be attached to the event so that other servers in the room do not need to ask the same question to the policy server?

For Synapse homeservers, the above paragraph's consequences are natural behaviour of the spam checker
module feature. A server could, with some performance penalty, deploy a module which calls the `/check`

> API to enact the consequences described above.

Author: https://github.com/element-hq/policyserv_spam_checker is an example of this, supported by https://matrix.org/blog/2025/04/introducing-policy-servers/

The new `/check` is described as follows:

```
POST /_matrix/policy/v1/event/:eventId/check
Authorization: X-Matrix ...
Content-Type: application/json

{PDU-formatted event}
```

> The request body is *optional* but *strongly recommended* for efficient processing, as the policy

Reviewer 8: Is there ever a situation where a server would be checking an event, having only its ID, and no PDU content? It just feels like an odd thing to make optional, and opens up the door (imo) to corner-cutting in implementations that might end up being incompatible, making the policy server potentially ineffective.

An example could be the new Meowlnir policy server being deployed on a non-Synapse server. If the server requesting the check doesn't include the PDU, meowlnir has nothing to work with. Calling `/event` to fetch it from the homeserver has a high probability of not working, since it's likely that the event has been soft failed (and consequently won't be returned), which effectively defeats the check.

I'd argue that making the PDU in the body *required* will be better and generally just more consistent, assuming slightly more bandwidth isn't something this MSC cares too much about,

Author: This MSC is *very* concerned about bandwidth/performance, and about the policy server being lied to :)

A server may not include the PDU for a couple of primary reasons:
1. It's processing a lot of traffic and those extra bytes are highly problematic for its operational environment.
2. It wants to know if the policy server hasn't seen the event yet, as it could be an indication that the policy server is being excluded by a malicious server during fanout. 

The second may be resolved by having the policy server return a flag, but the threat of having unknown events being flagged as spam should hopefully deter the behaviour.

I would expect that an implementation in meowlnir or another bot would *not* call `/event` to fetch it if excluded, and instead have (maybe configurable) behaviour to return a static response.

Reviewer 8: > This MSC is very concerned about bandwidth/performance

Ah, well, that changes things, and makes it being optional completely understandable!

> It wants to know if the policy server hasn't seen the event yet, as it could be an indication that the policy server is being excluded by a malicious server during fanout.

(assuming I haven't just missed it in my reading) this is probably something that should be clarified. Never crossed my mind that excluding the PDU could also be used to detect things like that, which actually brings it more use than bandwidth saving.

> server may not make efforts to locate the event over federation, especially during `/check`.

Reviewer 7: Maybe add «If the body is provided, the policy server SHALL verify that the event is signed by the claimed originating server.» to make the answer to the concerns in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284/#issuecomment-2816069392 explicit?

Author: This would be an implementation detail, but one we might want to formalize as a `SHOULD` rather than `MUST`.

> Authentication is achieved using normal [Federation API request authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#request-authentication).

Reviewer: I would assume it makes sense to extend delegation in this MSC if we are using the normal server name stuff. 

Since if the CS API can be separated it would make sense if this can also be separate but ofc using a separate subdomain always works as the MSC shows as an example.

> Authentication is achieved using normal [Federation API request authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#request-authentication).

Author: > Is routing to the server subject to the normal federation server name resolution stuff (https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#resolving-server-names) ?

Yes - it's intended that the server participates in the room, but may not implement the full suite of federation endpoints.

> Authentication is achieved using normal [Federation API request authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#request-authentication).

Author: 428cb1538d495a70c8e05d94ae44d0581e651008

Requests may be rate limited, but SHOULD have relatively high limits given event traffic.

The endpoint always returns `200 OK`, unless rate limited or a server-side unexpected error occurred.
If the request shape is invalid, the policy server SHOULD respond with a `spam` recommendation, as
shown below. If the event (or room) is not known to the policy server, it is left as an implementation
detail for whether to consider that event as `spam` or `ok`.

```
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{"recommendation": "spam"}
```

```
200 OK
Content-Type: application/json

{"recommendation": "ok"}
```

```
429 Rate Limited
Content-Type: application/json

{"error":"Too many requests","errcode":"M_RATE_LIMITED"}
```

```
500 Internal Server Error
Content-Type: application/json

{"error":"It broke","errcode":"M_UNKNOWN"}

> ```

Reviewer 9: How should the policy server respond when it is not designated as a policy server in the room's current state? https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/issues/18597#issuecomment-3155863264

Reviewer 9: > Policy servers generate recommendations, not requirements, so a server may call an undesignated (but still known) policy server to get additional opinions.

Ok, I hadn't realised they could also be used this way and that makes sense. I do think that some policy servers will not want to be used this way though and only want to respond to requests from certain rooms. At least in Draupnir's use for policy servers would want to work this way.

Reviewer 8: Meowlnir returns a 404 response when a check is called for a room it is not explicitly protecting, which implicitly allows the event

**TODO**: Figure out a way to expose which filters (if any) caused an event to be flagged as spam, to
allow for more nuanced decision making by servers/bots. Also, if exposed, figure out a way to do so
which doesn't expose that detail to potential attackers. Consider exposing with score metrics per filter.

As shown, `recommendation` may either be `spam` or `ok`. (**TODO**: Consider different keywords)

> **TODO**: Support namespaced identifiers in an array for more recommendations? ie: `[ok, org.example.warn_user]`

Reviewer 9: A way to send a warning to the user without needing to send the user a message would be very useful even when their event is marked as spam. Particularly when on-boarding users who are new to a community https://marewolf.me/posts/draupnir/25/02.html#priorities-why-on-boarding-is-the-best-place-to-focus. Because they probably will not always read the community's rules and welcome and try to do things straight away such as send images and links.

It's not clear to me whether the error message they will hopefully get in the client-server API for a user resident to a homeserver complying with the policy server will be enough. As clients might not make those user facing? What do you think?

(Another workaround would sending a phony whisper event down /sync but it's a bit cheeky and requires way more changes)

Author: We'd definitely need to specify some error codes for clients to use/warn as needed. We would also need to define some default behaviour for what a "warning" even is. Do we use [server notice rooms](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4279)? Do we return an `M_WARN` error code (but otherwise allow the event to send normally?)? Do we build some other system to handle warnings?

(these questions don't have answers)

I expect a warning system of any variety would be its own MSC to avoid this one getting stuck in process, once this one is closer to actually moving forward.

Author: this thread got moved to elsewhere in the MSC because the MSC has iterated on the direction it's taking - 0e9ece7d5059779b6ac1c84a2dfb31a9c943f0bc

Homeserver implementations SHOULD fail safely and assume events are *not* spam when they cannot reach
the policy server. However, they SHOULD also attempt to retry the request for a reasonable amount of
time.

In some implementations, a homeserver may cooperate further with the policy server to issue redactions
for spammy events, helping to keep the room clear for users on servers which didn't check with the
policy server ahead of sending their event(s). For example, `matrix.example.org` may have a user in
the room with permission to send redactions and `/check`s all events.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 10: Possibly this could be mitigated by having draupnir (or another moderation bot) also make requests to the policy server, and then redact events. You might see abuse content temporarily that way if your HS doesn't implement this MSC, but it may be better than nothing.

Important note about this is that the moderation bot would need to run on a server that _does not_ soft-fail events based on the policy server, otherwise it wouldn't be able to see the events it needs to redact.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 11: > Important note about this is that the moderation bot would need to run on a server that *does not* soft-fail events based on the policy server, otherwise it wouldn't be able to see the events it needs to redact.

Perhaps there should be a way to opt-in to receiving soft-failed events as a client, so that moderation tools can still view and send redactions for abuse content and such. Such functionality would feel less hacky than making sure to run moderation tools on an HS that doesn't support this MSC.

> ## Potential issues

Author: we're currently experimenting with having this done at the server level, via https://github.com/element-hq/policyserv_spam_checker for now

https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18238 is another early example of experimentation in this area

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 12: It kind of feels conceptually that each server should be able to redact events _for their users only_. This is in keeping with Matrix's server autonomy. Mod/admin servers can still redact which will still be broadcast to all other servers, but really whether this is applied is a per-server decision.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 6: @kegsay Such a design could also help prevent existing quirks, like DM conversation partners being able to unilaterally delete *all* conversation participants' messages.

> ## Potential issues

Author: Servers which use the policy server *should* be rejecting the events before they're sent to the room, instead of redacting them. A server could feasibly redact instead of send, but then it's just wasted events which may be further against room policy (flooding, "apparent malicious redaction", etc).

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 7: The attack vector is: a malicious homeserver in the room asks the policy server about another homeserver's event, and includes the event content as an optimisation. The content is forged, however. The policy server only follows explicit SHALL and SHOULD of the spec, accepts the event content and does not properly check its authenticity. The policy server proceeds to give a signed response that the event should be redacted. The malicious homeserver posts the response to get other homeservers to throw out the event. The stretch goal is to have enough blocked events allegedely from the same user in a row that some other policy mechanism bans the user.

> ## Potential issues

Author: I suppose the question is whether the policy server should be compelled to check hashes, or if it should be left as an implementation detail. I'm leaning towards implementation detail, as a room can change policy servers if needed, and it could be considered a security vulnerability in the implementation.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 9: It is annoying because it means that basic policy servers written as bots need to ask their own homeserver for each event they get asked about. But i haven't read the whole proposal yet so my bad if i'm missing something.

> ## Potential issues

Author: The remainder of the proposal addresses that concern.

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 9: Sorry, by remainder do you mean text that isn't in the draft yet?

> ## Potential issues

Author: > But i haven't read the whole proposal yet so my bad if i'm missing something.

The remainder being the parts that weren't read at the time of writing this^ :)

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 9: >  If the event (or room) is not known to the policy server, it is left as an implementation detail for whether to consider that event as spam or ok.

> Authentication is achieved using normal [Federation API request authentication](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/server-server-api/#request-authentication).

oki

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 9: If pass-through for bots and appservices is going to be left out of the proposal will there be some assurances that there will be something like a synapse module callback (so that a passthrough http api can be added via [synapse-http-antispam](https://github.com/maunium/synapse-http-antispam))? Otherwise we're gonna lock out a few tools.

> ## Potential issues

Author: (moving to a dedicated thread)

> ## Potential issues

Author: @Gnuxie [says](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284#discussion_r2089888535):

> If pass-through for bots and appservices is going to be left out of the proposal will there be some assurances that there will be something like a synapse module callback (so that a passthrough http api can be added via [synapse-http-antispam](https://github.com/maunium/synapse-http-antispam))? Otherwise we're gonna lock out a few tools.

(prior comments at link provide a bit more context. Paraphrasing: bots will have a hard time dealing with `X-Matrix` auth)

[see also](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284#discussion_r2070871905):

> It is annoying because it means that basic policy servers written as bots need to ask their own homeserver for each event (ie via [`GET /_matrix/client/v3/rooms/{roomId}/event/{eventId}`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#get_matrixclientv3roomsroomideventeventid)) they get asked about. But i haven't read the whole proposal yet so my bad if i'm missing something.

Author: We'll be experimenting with different architectures over the next few months, but some of those learnings will appear in future MSCs rather than this one. 

Currently, the implementation behaves as a standalone server with the essential functionality implemented. This has led to some complications when we want to do more sophisticated checks, so we're working on shifting some of the responsibility out of a standalone server and into an existing server like Synapse. 

Once the core functionality is in Synapse, it could export useful information out to the policy server itself through the appservice API. How non-appservice bots work, if at all, is not yet determined - it's possible they can't technically be policy servers, but they'll still have important value as layered protection for communities (especially if the advice is to not use a policy server most of the time).

> ## Potential issues

Reviewer 9: Flooding the policy server with events can still lead to a denial of service. This can be complicated by exploits that are being used in the wild that starve homeservers themselves of CPU.

- If the policy server fails to respond to querying homeservers in time, events sent during the attack will be treated as NOT SPAM https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284/files#diff-fda0d8463be8fc817bee6759cd09fd4e36c65ea05c9d9158870bbc905f123897R141-R143

Author: Yup - the MSC needs to call out more clearly that Policy Servers have to deal with that problem as a fact of life. They will be DDoS'd, either with event traffic or more generic attacks, and they need to survive that.

Reviewer 13: This is indeed a concern for Policy Servers. For Kubewarden's [policy-server](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server) we tackled this with a configurable deadline, and by failing-closed by default (configurable too).

> ## Potential issues

Author: (I'm considering this resolved. If not, please open a new thread on the updated diff to continue the conversation)

> ## Potential issues

Author: having thought about it for a while: I think the exact implementation of what happens to (maybe) spammy events is out of scope for this proposal. No current implementations automatically ban users for spam, but the implementations which time out users for breaking rules do consider trustworthiness of the source.

**TODO**: This section.

Broadly:
* Lack of batching is unfortunate (**TODO**: Fix this)

## Safety considerations

**TODO**: This section.

> ## Security considerations

Author: Servers should not send policy server state events through the policy server, or at least not act on them. Especially if the senders are the same. 

This is to prevent a malicious policy server from not allowing the room to escape, but we should still have a mechanism to prevent compromised accounts from adding/setting malicious servers if we can. 

Risk level of these 2 concerns is TBD.

Author: See https://github.com/element-hq/synapse/pull/18605

Author: ad6ef11c1c7a092e3c1c2375c955ebbe58d37fcc

> ## Security considerations

Author: ad6ef11c1c7a092e3c1c2375c955ebbe58d37fcc and 0e9ece7d5059779b6ac1c84a2dfb31a9c943f0bc note this.

**TODO**: This section.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 9: I'm sure it was suggested somewhere but requiring events be signed by policy servers at the auth level would be nice.

Reviewer 9: To add to this, we've failed to organise the ecosystem to avoid allowing registration on their homeservers without basic verification (open reg). Which doesn't bode well for trying to organise the ecosystem to optionally enable policy server checks.

Author: This is discussed in the MSC and in a few other threads. 

The overall idea is expected to be explored in a dedicated MSC, as our focus right now is existing rooms. We'll carve out room for the future once we're through this initial bit of work.

**TODO**: This section. Many of the inline TODOs describe some alternatives.

An alternative was considered where, in a future room version, all events must be signed by the policy
server before they're able to be added to the DAG. However, this results in compulsory centralization
and usage, removing the room's agency to choose which moderation tools they utilize and that room's

> ability to survive network partitions. This alternative does have an advantage of reducing bandwidth

Reviewer 7: Maybe a Certificate-Transparency-like option? 

A room admin MAY set a list L of policy servers, a count N, and a power level threshold T. By default, count is N=0, list L is empty, PL threshold is T=100. An even can only be incorporated if it originates from a user with PL≥T, OR it has N signatures from policy servers in L.

This way room admins can choose whom to trust, while avoiding a SPOF; they can also do an emergency override if it becomes necessary.

Author: This gets very complicated very quickly when working with state resolution and the auth rules, at least with how those algorithms currently work. Changes to the room model would certainly make a CT-style approach easier, though for now the rough plan is to spin the signing alternative out to a dedicated MSC to make this MSC more backwards-compatibility focused. The signing stuff would require a new room version to be enforceable, which doesn't help rooms that already exist today.

Author: An update: the signing stuff is being brought into this MSC, though the bit about making it a mandatory check in a new room version will be a future MSC. I'll leave this thread open for now as a reminder to bring it over to that future MSC.

spend across the federation (as there's no point in sending a spammy event if the policy server won't
sign it), but would require that communities upgrade their rooms to a compatible room version, which

> typically take significant time to specify and deploy.

Reviewer 2: This can still be added as an optimization - servers MAY get a signature from the policy server before sending an event to the room, which would allow other servers to skip the policy server check when receiving the event.

Author: It just doesn't have the same effect, unfortunately. The purpose of requiring a signature is to frontload the effort required to send event rather than be purely reactive.

Author: The MSC now talks about signatures.

> 

Reviewer 13: > We’d especially like to see implementations for non-Synapse servers

I would like to suggest Kubewarden's [`policy-server`](https://github.com/kubewarden/policy-server). [Kubewarden](https://www.kubewarden.io/) is a CNCF project implementing a policy engine for Kubernetes, and its `policy-server` can run [outside k8s](https://docs.kubewarden.io/howtos/raw-policies) and process any type of query (disclaimer, I'm a maintainer of the Kubewarden project).

The `policy-server` runs small policies compiled to Wasm (written in Rust, Go, CEL, Rego, with our provided small SDKs). These policies are shipped as OCI wasm artifacts. The `policy-server` allows implements a Wasm host with wapc-rs, receives a JSON request and accepts, rejects, or mutates the request depending on the outcome from the policies. The `policy-server` also does context-aware calls to other services apart from the JSON request that is evaluating at that moment (in this specific case, that would be adding querying a Matrix client).

Users of the policy-server can develop their own policies in their preferred languages, test them locally with our `kwctl` CLI tool, and share and reuse them via OCI registries. 

If interested, don't hesitate to have a look at our [docs](https://docs.kubewarden.io), ping me, or get in contact in our [Slack channel](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C03L52JRAFM).

  to again minimize risk of remote servers flagging the policy server as down.

Logical servers may prefer to have dedicated software run their `/sign` API, but otherwise leave the
remaining Federation API endpoints to be served by their existing software.

Existing homeserver software, such as Synapse, may further benefit by supporting `/sign`, but deferring
the actual spam/neutral check to a module or appservice (via API not defined by this MSC). In this
setup, Synapse would take on the request authentication and signature requirements while the module
simply returns `spam: true/false`. This would support moderation bots being policy servers themselves
without needing to implement the same requirements as dedicated hosts above.

Rooms which elect to use a policy server would do so via the new `m.room.policy` state
event (empty state key). The `content` has the following implied schema:

```json5
{
    "via": "policy.example.org", // the server name of the policy server
    "public_key": "unpadded_base64_signing_key" // that server's *public* signing key used for `/sign`
}
```

> **TODO**: Array for multiple policy servers?

Author: at the time of writing this comment, I thought it'd be helpful to deal with outages, but there's complications involved in supporting multiple servers (namely, if the concern was that the advertised server would be DDoS'd then surely having 3 servers listed just means there's now 3 targets). The concern of weakest link also applies.

This is to prevent an attack surface where a signing key is compromised and thus allows the attacker
to impersonate the server itself (though, they'll still be able to spam events as much as they want
because they can self-sign).

In some implementations, a homeserver may cooperate further with the policy server to issue redactions
for spammy events, helping to keep the room clear for users on servers which don't validate the signature
on events. For example, `matrix.example.org` may have a user in the room with permission to send
redactions and redacts all events that aren't properly signed by the policy server.

### Implementation considerations

When determining whether to sign an event, policy servers might wish to consider the following cases
in addition to any implementation-specific checks/filters:

* Is the requesting server [ACL'd](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#server-access-control-lists-acls)?
  The `/sign` endpoint is open to ACL'd servers, but that doesn't mean it needs to return a signature
  for such servers.
* **TODO**: Add more as they are encountered.

> ## Potential issues

Author: I've incorporated this into the proposal in an upcoming commit. Please create a new thread if I've missed something important (the commit is quite large, and I probably just forgot).

  moderation bot/advanced tooling redactions, and eventually considering those events as spammy.

  As already mentioned, a future MSC is expected to de-risk this completely through a new room version
  which requires relevant signatures on events.

* Sending servers can attempt to find a place in the DAG where a policy server wasn't set or wasn't
  joined and place their event there. Such events are likely to become [soft failed](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/server-server-api/#soft-failure)
  in rooms which layer their safety protections. For example, banning users which routinely work
  around the policy server.

  It's also worth considering that a homeserver or other moderation tool could cooperate with a policy
  server to check events this proposal would otherwise decline to check. For example, a moderation
  tool could check *every* event it sees with the room's policy server (if allowed by that policy
  server), regardless of whether this proposal says it *should* be checked in that way. This can
  highlight potentially spammy messages or attempts (accidental or malicious) to reference old parts

>   of the DAG.

Author: It's tempting to mirror Synapse's in-practice implementation rather than this MSC's approach. Synapse always uses the *current* policy state event to determine which key and server (if any) to look for signatures from. This means that ancient events might get caught by the policy when they weren't at the time, but also means that it's harder for a spammer to find a hole in the DAG.

On the other hand, this MSC's approach of "state at the subject event" means the room's previous desire to *not* have a policy server are honoured.

Thoughts are welcome on which approach feels "better". Both are equally difficult to implement, I believe.

# MSC4284: Policy Servers

> Communities on Matrix are typically formed through [Spaces](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#spaces),

Author: I'm not sure the intro can be made much shorter, honestly. It's important that this feature be framed appropriately, and that it avoids assumptions about who it applies to. Communities being spaces is one of those assumptions this MSC tries to remove (because communities are more than just spaces).

  routing to `/dev/null`) to minimize risk of remote servers flagging them as "offline".
* Supporting [device lookups](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1userdevicesuserid)
  to again minimize risk of remote servers flagging the policy server as offline.

Logical servers might prefer to route `/sign` to dedicated software at their reverse proxy.

Existing homeserver software, such as Synapse, may further benefit by supporting `/sign`, but deferring
the actual spam/neutral check to a module or appservice (via API not defined by this MSC). In this
setup, Synapse would take on the request authentication and signature requirements while the module
simply returns `spam: true/false`. This would support moderation bots being policy servers themselves
without needing to implement the same requirements as dedicated hosts above.

Rooms which elect to use a policy server would do so via the new `m.room.policy` state
event (empty state key). The `content` has the following implied schema:

```json5
{
  "via": "policy.example.org", // the server name of the policy server

>   "public_key": "unpadded_base64_signing_key" // that server's *public* signing key used for `/sign`

Author: (merging with https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284#discussion_r2710217470 despite timestamps)

}
```

**Note**: Only a single server can be listed. See the Alternatives section for details on what a
multi-server setup might require.

The sender of the `m.room.policy` state event will need to know the server's `public_key` in order
to populate the event. If the power levels of the room allow, the policy server itself or a dedicated

> bot might be able to set the state event directly. In other cases, a human user might be trying to

Reviewer 14: nit: a lot of this feels confusingly specific: not sure how "the policy server" would set it other than by being what you'd essentially call a bot, and surely the bot doesn't have to be "dedicated", it could be any bot.

from the Client-Server API, the following are supported on HTTP 400 responses:

* `M_BAD_JSON` - The supplied PDU-formatted event was improperly formatted (ie: missing required
  keys for the room version).
* `M_NOT_JSON` - The request body wasn't JSON.
* `M_NOT_FOUND` - The room ID is not known or not protected by the policy server.
* [MSC4387's `M_SAFETY` error code](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4387)
  (if accepted into the spec).

**Note**: To clarify, servers are *not* required to return an error. They can hide the underlying
reason with a 200+`{}` response instead.

A 403 `M_FORBIDDEN` error MAY be returned by the policy server if the caller is
[ACL'd](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/server-server-api/#server-access-control-lists-acls). This is
not a "MUST" because policy servers may not always have full room state context when optimized for
content moderation over Matrix moderation.

A standard 429 `M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` is returned when the policy server is rate limiting the caller.

Upon receipt of an event in a room with a policy server, the homeserver SHOULD verify that the policy

> server's signature is present on the event *and* uses the key from the current `m.room.policy` state event.

Reviewer 15: "uses the key" -- I think this really means "passes signature checks"? I can't find the relevant reference in the spec right now though.

Reviewer 15: Right and it isn't even a key from `/_matrix/key/v2/server`. We do need the same checks though just with a specific key though. I don't feel strongly this needs to be clarified though.

server and use that result to determine whether to pass the event through unimpeded or soft fail it.
The homeserver SHOULD persist the policy server's signature with the event so the signature is passed
transitively to other servers which request the event from the homeserver.

**Note**: Advanced tooling, likely built into moderation bots, may further send redactions for events
which are soft failed due to the policy server's recommendation. This helps remove content from the
room for users which are stuck on an older/uncooperative homeserver.

**Note**: Events can be missing signatures either maliciously or accidentally. Outdated servers which
don't support this proposal wouldn't know that they need to get the signature, and servers which
intentionally don't request a signature would be trying to send unwanted content to the room.

**Note**: Because servers will check events against the current policy server for the room, a policy
server might get asked to sign events from "before" it was enabled in the room. This could be because
a server has discovered old history in the room that the policy server hasn't seen before, or due to

> the event's sender allow the `origin_server_ts` timestamp to drift. This proposal leaves it as an

Reviewer 14: some grammar has gone wrong here I think and I'm not sure exactly how ("due to the event's sender allow the `origin_server_ts` timestamp to drift")

When implemented fully, users attempting to send "spammy" events according to the policy server will
not be sent to the room because the homeserver will have failed to acquire a signature. Users also
won't see events which lacked a valid signature from the policy server, for events which originate
from a homeserver that sent events without asking the policy server to sign them (or did ask and got
a refusal to sign, but sent the event anyway).

**Note**: A future MSC is expected to make the signature required in a future room version when a
policy server is in use by the room. Centralization concerns related to that architecture are best
reserved for that future MSC.

### Implementation considerations

* For improved security, policy servers SHOULD NOT publish the key they use inside the state event on
  [`/_matrix/key/v2/server`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#get_matrixkeyv2server).
  This keeps the concerns of "can send federation traffic" and "can mark events as neutral (not spammy)"
  separate, and further means that a room can revoke the key without cooperation from the policy

>   server.

Reviewer 15: I'm not sure what "state event" is referring to here, I think what it is really saying though is:

> Servers acting as policy servers should use separate keys for federation and policy servers. Federation keys should only be used at `/key/v2/server` and policy keys should only be available at `.well-known/matrix/policy_servers` (and the relevant state events).

Author: I've added clarification to which state event. 

The implementation considerations section is also normative (it's nested under "Proposal"), so these bullets are intended to make it to actual spec.

  events, helping to keep the room clear for users on servers which don't involve the policy server
  in their checks. For example, a room with `policy.example.org` and `matrix.example.org` might have
  redactions sent by `@mod:matrix.example.org` rather than anyone from `policy.example.org`. How this
  cooperation happens is left as an implementation detail.

* If a policy server implements rate limiting, those rate limits *SHOULD* be relatively high. Clients
  often retry events potentially dozens of times before giving up, which can quickly exhaust a server's
  burst limit. Some servers may also be more chatty than others depending on how many active users
  they have.

* Policy servers SHOULD cache and deduplicate requests to `/sign` based on the event ID. When a server
  sends an event not signed by the policy server in a popular room, all of the other servers in that
  room may request that signature from the policy server right away. This can be a lot of requests.

  Caching is also important for consistency. There is no mechanism to inform servers that an event's
  spam or neutral designation has changed. If the policy server does change designation of an event,

>   it can lead to user-visible split brains as one server soft fails the spam and another doesn't.

Reviewer 15: Is "caching" here really "persistent storage" then to ensure an event doesn't change to/from spammy over time?

  be illegal under the room's authorization rules, and are rejected accordingly.

* DAG-aware policy servers MAY check events sent before the policy server was involved (according to
  the DAG, not according to timestamps) differently from those after the policy server became involved.

  This might include:

  * Allowing the event because it was (presumably) legal at the time in the DAG.
  * Running "critical" checks, but skipping others. For example, scanning media for unwanted content
    but not applying message length limits.
  * Treating the event no different than any other event and running the full suite of checks against
    it.

* Policy servers SHOULD be aware of clock drift, both malicious and accidental. In some cases it may
  be possible to detect events that are being sent before the room was even created, though any
  definition of `time.now()` will need a fairly forgiving range of values to handle slow or out of
  sync servers.

  Policy servers SHOULD NOT use `origin_server_ts` to determine if an event was sent "before" the
  policy server was involved in the room.

> ## Potential issues

Author: This does apply during invite calls and calls to `/send_[join|leave|knock]` already. The server is creating an event which needs a signature from the policy server in order to not be soft failed.

Events at the "make" stage of the join/knock/leave dance are incomplete and might become refused by the policy server on those grounds.

* [Receiving transactions](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#transactions) (possibly
  routing to `/dev/null`) to minimize risk of remote servers flagging them as "offline".
* Supporting [device lookups](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1userdevicesuserid)
  to again minimize risk of remote servers flagging the policy server as offline.

Logical servers might prefer to route `/sign` to dedicated software at their reverse proxy.

Existing homeserver software, such as Synapse, may further benefit by supporting `/sign`, but deferring
the actual spam/neutral check to a module or appservice (via API not defined by this MSC). In this
setup, Synapse would take on the request authentication and signature requirements while the module
simply returns `spam: true/false`. This would support moderation bots being policy servers themselves
without needing to implement the same requirements as dedicated hosts above.

Rooms which elect to use a policy server would do so via the new `m.room.policy` state
event (empty state key). The `content` has the following implied schema:

```json5
{

>   "via": "policy.example.org", // the server name providing room policy (the "policy server")

Reviewer 16: something of a bikeshed, but I do wonder if a name like `policy_server` would be more meaningful than `via`

>   "public_key": "unpadded_base64_signing_key" // that server's *public* signing key used for `/sign`

Author: I somehow completely skipped over the entire cryptographic agility concern, so let's just do what's proposed in the comment here.

For history: [another suggestion](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4284#discussion_r2688908463) is to carry the algorithm information adjacent to the key.

multi-server setup might require.

The sender of the `m.room.policy` state event will need to know the server's `public_key` in order
to populate the event. To help clients convert a server name to a public key, policy servers SHOULD implement the following
`/.well-known/matrix/policy_server` endpoint. If the endpoint is not supported by the policy server,
the `public_key` will need to be sourced out of band to populate the state event.

**Note**: Servers MUST only use the `m.room.policy` state event as a source of truth for the policy
server's public key. The well-known endpoint exists exclusively for clients to use to populate the
state event. The endpoint does *not* exist to make `public_key` optional or act as a secondary lookup
for the key.

`GET /.well-known/matrix/policy_server` is a Client-Server API endpoint similar to the existing
[`/support`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#getwell-knownmatrixsupport) well-known
endpoint. It MAY be rate limited, and MUST NOT require authentication. Like other well-known endpoints,
the request is made to the server name *before* resolving it to something the Federation API can

> use. Also like other well-known endpoints, it [supports CORS](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#web-browser-clients).

Reviewer 16: Given it's part of the C-S API, this reference to the Federation API is confusing. I *think* what you mean is:

```suggestion
endpoint. It MAY be rate limited, and MUST NOT require authentication. Like other well-known endpoints,
the request is made to the server's [`server_name`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#server-name)
rather than the base URL of the client-server API. Also like other well-known endpoints, it
[supports CORS](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#web-browser-clients).
```

The `GET /.well-known/matrix/policy_server` endpoint returns the following, ideally with a

> `Content-Type: application/json` header:

Reviewer 16: is this "ideally" a SHOULD?

* `404 M_UNRECOGNIZED` - The server is not a policy server (the endpoint isn't implemented).
* `405 M_UNRECOGNIZED` - The server is a policy server, but the caller used the wrong HTTP method.
* `429 M_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` - The server is rate limiting the caller.

Upon receipt of an event in a room with a policy server, the homeserver SHOULD verify that the policy
server's signature is present on the event *and* uses the key from the current `m.room.policy` state event.
If the signature is invalid or for the wrong key, the homeserver SHOULD [soft fail](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#soft-failure)
the event. If the signature is plainly missing, the homeserver SHOULD call `/sign` on the policy
server and use that result to determine whether to pass the event through unimpeded or soft fail it.
The homeserver SHOULD persist the policy server's signature with the event so the signature is passed
transitively to other servers which request the event from the homeserver.

**Note**: Signatures might be present but invalid/wrong due to the policy server's key rotating. In
these cases, it's appropriate for a homeserver to request another signature from the policy server

> to confirm whether the event is spammy. See the Security Considerations section for details.

Author: I'll add this to the proposal. Short version is it can compare state *at* the event with current state: if the policy server's key changed between those two points, the key has probably rotated.

* For improved security, policy servers SHOULD NOT publish the key they use inside the `m.room.policy`
  state event on [`/_matrix/key/v2/server`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.15/server-server-api/#get_matrixkeyv2server).
  This keeps the concerns of "can send federation traffic" and "can mark events as neutral (not spammy)"
  separate, and further means that a room can revoke the key without cooperation from the policy
  server.

* Homeservers or moderation bots MAY cooperate with policy servers to issue redactions for spammy
  events, helping to keep the room clear for users on servers which don't involve the policy server
  in their checks. For example, a room with `policy.example.org` and `matrix.example.org` might have
  redactions sent by `@mod:matrix.example.org` rather than anyone from `policy.example.org`. How this
  cooperation happens is left as an implementation detail.

* If a policy server implements rate limiting, those rate limits *SHOULD* be relatively high. Clients
  often retry events potentially dozens of times before giving up, which can quickly exhaust a server's
  burst limit. Some servers may also be more chatty than others depending on how many active users

>   they have.

Author: If folks implemented that, yes.

  * Running "critical" checks, but skipping others. For example, scanning media for unwanted content
    but not applying message length limits.
  * Treating the event no different than any other event and running the full suite of checks against
    it.

* Policy servers SHOULD be aware of clock drift, both malicious and accidental. In some cases it may
  be possible to detect events that are being sent before the room was even created, though any
  definition of `time.now()` will need a fairly forgiving range of values to handle slow or out of
  sync servers.

  Policy servers SHOULD NOT use `origin_server_ts` to determine if an event was sent "before" the
  policy server was involved in the room.

## Potential issues

* Already noted in the proposal, existing rooms might have servers in them which don't know about
  policy servers. This can lead to events which aren't signed by the policy server, and thus could
  be considered spam automatically. This proposal aims to minimize that by suggesting that receiving
  servers for an event ask for a signature from the policy server, though prior versions of this

>   proposal already tried such a mechanism (`/check`) with limited success. Unstable policy server

Reviewer 16: It feels like if you're going to mention "prior versions of this proposal", you need to say how the prior versions were different. Otherwise you might as well just say:

```suggestion
  be considered spam automatically. This proposal aims to minimize that by suggesting that receiving
  servers for an event ask for a signature from the policy server, though unstable implementations of
  this proposal have had limited success. Unstable policy server
```

  implementations have found that single-digit kHz amounts of requests are trivially possible with
  rooms not much larger than the v12 HQ room (created ~1-2 months ago as of writing).

  This is expected to be fixed in a future room version with a future MSC. That future MSC will likely
  make getting a signature required, which removes the need for a fallback `/sign` request. In the
  meantime, policy servers SHOULD be designed, built, and deployed with the assumption that they will
  receive an extremely high volume of requests, especially during spam waves.

* The `m.room.policy` event is *not* protected from redaction in this proposal. Doing so would require
  a new room version, which delays availability of this tooling to communities. A future MSC (probably
  the same one which fixes the DoS issue above) is expected to alter the redaction algorithm to protect
  critical portions of the `m.room.policy` state event.

>   In the meantime, it's advised to never redact `m.room.policy` state events with empty state keys.

Author: The redaction is still (unfortunately) applied because the event isn't *rejected*, it's soft-failed. The redaction might not be delivered to all of the clients, but all of the servers will have a consistent view of room state.

simply returns `spam: true/false`. This would support moderation bots being policy servers themselves
without needing to implement the same requirements as dedicated hosts above.

Rooms which elect to use a policy server would do so via the new `m.room.policy` state
event (empty state key). The `content` has the following implied schema:

```json5
{
  "via": "policy.example.org", // the server name providing room policy (the "policy server")
  "public_keys": {
    // MUST contain at least `ed25519` for event signing. The key version will be "policy_server",
    // defined later.
    "ed25519": "unpadded_base64_signing_key" // that server's *public* signing key used for `/sign`
  }
}
```

**Note**: Only a single server can be listed. See the Alternatives section for details on what a
multi-server setup might require.

The sender of the `m.room.policy` state event will need to know the server's `public_keys` in order
to populate the event. To help clients convert a server name to a public key, policy servers SHOULD implement the following
`/.well-known/matrix/policy_server` endpoint. If the endpoint is not supported by the policy server,

> the `public_keys` will need to be sourced out of band to populate the state event.

Reviewer 17: Why are we creating a new way of distributing keys? This is going to make it much harder to incorporate any changes we do to the standard key systems.

Can we not just basically say "contact and lookup the policy server as per standard federation"? It doesn't need to implement the full federation API, just the keys endpoints.

MUST NOT require authentication. Like other well-known endpoints,
the request is made to the server's [`server_name`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/appendices/#server-name)
rather than the base URL of the client-server API. Also like other well-known endpoints, it
[supports CORS](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.17/client-server-api/#web-browser-clients).

The `GET /.well-known/matrix/policy_server` endpoint returns a response body as shown below. It SHOULD
have a `Content-Type: application/json` response header.

```jsonc
{
  "public_keys": { // required; the same thing that appears in the state event
    "ed25519": "unpadded_base64_signing_key" // also required, and the same as in the state event
  }
}
```

The state event's `via` is the same as the domain name used to get the JSON document. Callers MUST
use `https://` when calling the endpoint.

The server name in `via` MUST additionally have at least one *joined* user in the room. That user does
not need any special power levels - they just need to be joined. This is to ensure the policy server
itself has agency to decide which rooms it actually generates recommendations for. Otherwise, any

> random (potentially malicious) community could drag the policy server into rooms and overwhelm it.

Reviewer 18: If the policy server's user leaves a room with a previously valid `m.room.policy` state event, presumably homeservers SHOULD stop attempting to use it to verify events?

And in this case, how would anyone send a new `m.room.policy` state event, if the policy server isn't answering request anymore? :)

Best to be explicit to ensure implementations catch these edge cases.
